TRANSCRIPT
Manila - one of Asia's megalopolises. Fifteen million people live here. Like most Asians, rice is their staple food crop. No other edible plant provides more people with nourishment to live. Rice is the number one cereal food in the world. The world population keeps growing, and the need for rice will soon double in some regions of the world.

Rice farmers are under pressure. They fear new crop diseases and extreme weather. The flooding of whole river deltas in Asia recently destroyed a year's harvest. The few modern cultivars that the farmers use because of their high yields can no longer survive in these conditions. Rice is normally grown on flooded fields, but the water volume has to be painstakingly regulated. The plants cannot stay immersed in water for more than seven days, or they will die.

Researchers in Manila at IRRI, the International Rice Research Institute, are alarmed. Robust traditional rice cultivars are being stored here. The researchers believe they hold the key to cultivating new types of rice that will withstand floods, drought, heat and even salt water. Not only high yielding, but resilient as well, that's the researchers' goal. This is where the institute keeps its treasures. This molecular biologist has everything she needs to do her research. Rice seeds in protective aluminium bags. More than 110,000 varieties are frozen and conserved here. The seeds hold various dormant genetic characteristics, including those needed to withstand extreme climate shifts.

An old Indian variety could hold the solution. It emerges unscathed after several weeks under water. The researchers were able to discover the determining gene only recently - the Sub 1 gene. They aim to cross-hybridize this flood-resistant trait with a modern, high-yield variety. The Sub 1 gene is bred into the widely-planted rice variety IR64. The rice is artificially flooded for 10 days as part of an experimental test to measure its resistance. The result is breathtaking. The rice that is resistant to flooding now yields significantly more.

There are thought to still be more than 160,000 varieties of rice, so-called cultivars. They are the key to securing the world's rice supply for the long-term.